Chapters 1 & 2 Revisions 05-02-2025 (#5113)
dfinity/motoko: doc/md/fundamentals/2-types/3-functions.md

> # Function types

Reviewer: There are several typos in the above suggestion^ , @Demali-876 please edit this for grammar, spelling, and style guide compliance before applying.

> # Function types

Author: This was applied i just simplified it similar to the swift documentation that i thought was welcoming.

> Functions are reusable chunks of code that perform a specific task. A function is defined with a name, optional parameters, and returns a result of a defined when called. A function can also specify a return type for the value it produces.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Functions are reusable chunks of code that perform a specific task. A function is defined with a name and optional parameters, then returns a defined result. A function can also specify a return type for the value it produces.
```

> :::info Side Effects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::info Side effects
```

> In the process of producing a result, the execution of the function can have other side-effects, like modifying state, printing to the log, or sending messages to other canisters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the process of producing a result, the execution of the function can have other side effects, like modifying state, printing to the log, or sending messages to other canisters.
```

:::

Functions can be synchronous or asynchronous. A synchronous function blocks the caller until it returns with a result, just like functions in most traditional programming languages.

An asynchronous function returns immediately, providing a **future** value as a placeholder for its result. The caller can await the future later to retrieve the result or ignore it and continue with other tasks.

> Motoko has functions with different capabilities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Motoko has different sorts of functions with different capabilities.
```
(The `sorts` was intentional. That terminology is also used in the grammar and the reference manual.)

> Local functions, declared using just the `func` keyword, are typically synchronous but can be asynchronous if their body is an `async` expression.

Reviewer 2: Local functions can only be called inside the actor - they are not available to remote callers and cannot be shared in messages.

> Local functions, declared using just the `func` keyword, are typically synchronous but can be asynchronous if their body is an `async` expression.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Local functions, declared using just the `func` keyword, are typically synchronous but can be asynchronous if their body is an `async` expression.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A local function is only available to call within the actor that defines it, it cannot be called from another actor, or be sent to another actor in a message.

```

Shared functions, declared in actor bodies using the `shared`, `shared query` or `shared composite query` keywords, are asynchronous.

> Calling a shared function sends a message to another actor. The caller of a shared function is typically another Motoko actor, ICP canister or frontend code interacting with the ICP using an agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Calling a shared function sends a message to another actor. The caller of a shared function is typically another Motoko actor, a [canister](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/essentials/canisters), or an [agent](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/interact-with-canisters/agents/overview).
```

An actor's shared functions are always called as the result of the actor receiving some message. Shared functions that return a result have `async` return types.

> Since actors can only have `shared` functions as public members, the `shared` keyword can, and usually is, omitted from public actor functions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since actors can only have `shared` functions as public members, the `shared` keyword  is optional and can be omitted from public actor functions.
```

| Keyword  | Function  |
|-------------|--------------|

> | `public`    | Makes a function callable by users or other [canisters](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/essentials/canisters). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
This isn't a property of functions per se but of the  declarations withing actor, modules, objects etc.

> | `private`    | Restricts the function visiblity to the namespace (actor, class or module). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
See above

> | `shared`    | Provides access to the caller’s identity. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `shared`    | Used to enable async communication between actors. Exposes the caller’s identity. |
```

> | `async`     | Runs the function [asynchronously](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/actors-async#async--await) and returns a future. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `async`     | Runs the function [asynchronously](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/actors-async#async--await) and returns its result in a future. |
```

Local functions run within the canister's [actor](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/actors-async). They cannot call other [canisters](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/essentials/canisters). Local functions are cheap to call and execute synchronously.  

```motoko
persistent actor CommonDivisor{
  func gcd(a : Nat, b : Nat) : Nat {
    var x = a;
    var y = b;

    while (y != 0) {
      let temp = y;
      y := x % y;
      x := temp;
    };

    x  // Return value is the GCD
  };
let greatestCommonDivisor : Nat = gcd(108, 54); // Synchronous execution
};
```

The type of `gcd` is `(Nat, Nat) -> Nat` indicating that it expects a pair of naturals as the input argument and returns a natural as a result.  

**Example use case:** Local computations that do not require communication with other actors or canisters.  

## Generic functions

Generic functions allow the use of type parameters, making them more flexible for using different data types.

```motoko name=swap
func swap<T, U>(t : T, u : U) : (U, T) {
  (u, t)
};

swap<Nat, Text>(42, "ICP"); // ("ICP", 42)
```

> The type of `swap` is `<T, U> (T, U) -> (U, T)`, indicating it can accept any two types and return them in reversed order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The type of `swap` is `<T, U> (T, U) -> (U, T)`, indicating it can accept any  two types `T` and `U`, a  value of tuple type `(T, U)` and return a tuple of type `(U, T)`, with the elements swapped.
```

Type arguments can be omitted from calls when the compiler can infer them from the arguments and context, allowing the simpler code:

> ```motoko include=swap

Reviewer: This does not compile and gives an error in the preview

Reviewer 2: (works ok in make preview)

Reviewer: Demali and I chatted in Slack about this; it works in make preview but not on the portal (and doesn't work on the live docs currently), so we should not be using this until we have time to investigate the error.

> ```motoko include=swap

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```motoko no-repl
```

The public functions of an actor determine its external interface. All public functions in an actor must be shared and can be either `shared`, `shared query` or `shared composite query` functions. Private functions cannot be `shared`.
Since an actor's public functions must be shared, the `shared` keyword is optional and can be omitted.  

`shared` functions permanently update the state of an actor, while `query` and `composite` `query` functions are only executed for their result.

Although queries can temporarily alter the state of an actor, these changes are not permanent and are never visible to other callers. It's as if each query operates on a copy of the actor, which is discarded when the query returns.

When called from a front-end, `query` functions generally have much lower latency than equivalent shared functions. This is because shared functions require the protocol to reach consensus on the state changes and results, whereas query functions do not.

```motoko no-repl
persistent actor Account {
  var balance = 0;

  public shared func deposit(amount : Nat) : async Nat {
    balance += amount;
    balance
  }
}
```

Omitting the shared keyword, we can also write:

> ```motoko no-repl

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```motoko no-repl name=Account
```

Reviewer: I tagged you in the relevant thread on slack - we won't be using these name/include bits

persistent actor Account {
  var balance = 0;

  public func deposit(amount : Nat) : async Nat {
    balance += amount;
    balance
  }
}
```

The deposit function has type `: shared Nat -> async Nat`.

> 

Reviewer 2: It would be good to add an example:

````suggestion
Consider this code:

``` motoko include=Account
let b1 = await Account.deposit(50);
let b2 = await Acccount.deposit(50);
(b1,b2)
```
The first class to `Account.balance(50)` increments `balance` from `0` to `50`, returning `50`.
The second call increments the balance from `50` to `100`, returning `100`.

Because `Account.deposit` is asynchronous, its results are returned in futures of type `async Nat`. Calling `await` on a each future extracts the results of the calls when they become available (so `b1` is `50` and `b2` is `100`).
````

> **Example use case**: Transactions, user [state](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/state) updates, or anything that modifies persistent data.

Reviewer 2: I thought I added an example of oneway function called `credit` but perhaps it got deleted somehow:

````suggestion

**Example use case**: Transactions, user [state](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/state) updates, or anything that modifies persistent data.

### Oneway functions

An update function can, but need not, return a future. An update function can just return `()` to indicate that it can be called for its side effect, but its result cannot be awaited.
Such a function is called a _oneway_ (or _fire-and-forget_) function.

An example of this might be a variant of `Account.deposit`, `Account.credit`, that merely updates the balance without returning it's new value:

```motoko no-repl
persistent actor Account {
  var balance = 0;
  public func credit(amount : Nat) : () {
    balance += amount;
  }
}
```

Calling `Account.credit(100)` updates the balance by `100`;

``` motoko include=Account
Account.credit(100);
```

Again, the shared keyword is optional. Note that `Account.credit(100` just returns control, it doesn't return a future that you can await. The call is executed asynchronously.

**Example use case**: log messages, asynchronous notifications, messages that don't require explicit acknowledgements or return values.
````

```motoko no-repl
let result = swap(42, "ICP"); // Inferred as <Nat, Text>
```

## Local, asynchronous functions  

Local function that have an `async`  or `async*` return type are asynchronous and can interact with other canisters by calling shared functions.  

They are useful for defining  asynchronous logic  used in the implementation of public  `shared` functions.

```motoko no-repl
import Time "mo:base/Time";
import Logger "canister:Logger";

persistent actor {
  private func log(msg : Text) : async () {
    Logger.log(Time.now() + msg); // sends a message
  };
  public shared func doStuff() : async () {
    await log("doingStuff"); } }
```

A more efficient variation is to use `async*` and `await*` that avoids the overhead of ordinary `await` just to call the local function:  

```motoko no-repl
import Time "mo:base/Time"
import Logger "canister:Logger";

persistent actor {  
  private func log(msg : Text) : async* () {
    Logger.log(Time.now() + msg); // sends a message
  };

  public shared func doStuff() : async () {
    await* log("doingStuff");
  }
}  
```

## Shared functions

> The public functions of an actor determine its external interface. All public functions in an actor must be shared and can be either `shared`, `shared query` or `shared composite query` functions. Private functions cannot be `shared`.
> Since an actor's public functions must be shared, the `shared` keyword is optional and can be omitted.  
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The public functions of an actor define its external interface. All public functions must be shared and can be either `shared`, `shared query`, or `shared composite query` functions. Private functions, on the other hand, cannot be `shared`.

Since public functions must be shared, the `shared` keyword is optional and can be omitted.

```

Reviewer: Replace paragraph below with:

`shared` functions permanently update the state of an actor, while `query` and `composite query` functions are only executed for their result. 

Although queries can temporarily alter the state of an actor, these changes are not permanent and are never visible to other callers. It's as if each query operates on a copy of the actor, which is discarded when the query returns.

When called from a front-end, `query` functions generally have much lower latency than equivalent `shared` functions. This is because `shared` functions require the protocol to reach consensus on the state changes and results, whereas `query` functions do not.

Local functions run within the canister's [actor](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/fundamentals/actors-async). They cannot call other [canisters](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/building-apps/essentials/canisters). Local functions are cheap to call and execute synchronously.  

```motoko no-repl

> func gcd(a : Nat, b : Nat) : Nat {

Author: ```motoko
func gcd(a : Nat, b : Nat) : Nat {
  if (b == 0) {
    a
  } else {
    gcd(b, a % b)
  }
};
```

I'll leave the recursive version here. I think the iterative version still is easier to grasp a little bit more explicit and introduces control flow. I don't feel too strongly on this but considering we've yet to introduce recursion I think we should keep the iterative example.

  var x = a;
  var y = b;

  while (y != 0) {
    let temp = y;
    y := x % y;
    x := temp;
  };

  x  // Return value is the GCD
};

let greatestCommonDivisor : Nat = gcd(108, 54); // Synchronous execution
```

> The type of `add` is `(Nat, Nat) -> Nat` indicating that it expects a pair of naturals  as argument and returns a natural as a result.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The type of `gcd` is `(Nat, Nat) -> Nat` indicating that it expects a pair of naturals  as argument and returns a natural as a result.  
```

let text = identity<Text>("Hello");  
```

> The type of identity is `<T>T -> T`, indicating that when supplied with any type `T`, and argument of type `T`, it returns a result of the same type `T`.

Reviewer 2: Come to think of it, a more interesting example might be `swap<T, U>(t : T, u:U) : (U, T) { (t, u) }` because it actually does something useful.

> The type of identity is `<T> T -> T`, indicating that when supplied with any type `T`, and argument of type `T`, it returns a result of the same type `T`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The type of identity is `<T>T -> T`, indicating that when supplied with any type `T`, and argument of type `T`, it returns a result of the same type `T`.
```
That's how Motoko prints it.

Local function that have an `async`  or `async*` return type are asynchronous and can interact with other canisters by calling shared functions.  

They are useful for defining  asynchronous logic  used in the implementation of public  `shared` functions.

```motoko no-repl
import Time "mo:base/Time";
import Logger "canister:Logger";

> persistent actor {

Reviewer 2: There's no indentation in this example.

> persistent actor {
> private func log(msg : Text) : async () {
> Logger.log(Time.now() + msg); // sends a message

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
persistent actor {
  private func log(msg : Text) : async () {
    Logger.log(Time.now() + msg); // sends a message
```

A more efficient variation is to use `async*` and `await*` that avoids the overhead of ordinary `await` just to call the local function:  

```motoko no-repl
import Time "mo:base/Time"
import Logger "canister:Logger";

persistent actor {  
  private func log(msg : Text) : async* () {
    Logger.log(Time.now() + msg); // sends a message
  };

  public shared func doStuff() : async () {
    await* log("doingStuff");
  }
}  
```

## Shared functions

The public functions of an actor determine its external interface. All public functions in an actor must be shared and can be either `shared`, `shared query` or `shared composite query` functions. Private functions cannot be `shared`.

> Since public functions must be `shared`, the `shared` keyword is optional and can be committed.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since public functions must be `shared`, the `shared` keyword is optional and can be omitted.  
```

> Since public functions must be `shared`, the `shared` keyword is optional and can be committed.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since an actor's public functions must be shared, the `shared` keyword is optional and can be committed.  
```

> `shared` functions permanently update the state of an actor, while `query` and `composite query` functions are only executed for their result. While queries can temporarily alter the state of the actor, the changes are not permanent and never visible to other callers. It's as if each query operated on a copy of the actor that is discarded on return from the query. When called from a front-end, `query` functions have much lower latency than calling the equivalent `shared` method. This is because `shared` functions require the protocol to reach consensus on the state changes and result of a shared function, while `query` functions do not.  

Reviewer 2: Below,  in the second version Account, you want to delete the `shared` keyword (since that is what you are showing).

Reviewer 2: One thing we don't illustrate is one way/ fire and forget methods. I guess you could do that by adding a credit method:
```
persistent actor Account {  
  ...
   public shared func credit(amount : Nat) : () {  
     balance += amount;  
  }  

}  
```
This updates the state, but doesn't return a future, so cannot be awaited. This is only allowed for shared update functions.

Author: There is a set greeting function that demonstrates this. the only different is async need to be removed. To be more consistent with the examples we can use the account actor.

> ### Shared query functions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Shared query functions
```
The subheading is not needed.

A good example of a composite query might be a bank that holds references to its individual accounts, implemented as separate actors, and provides a composite query that sums the deposits in all its accounts:  

```motoko no-repl
persistent actor Counter {
  type Account = actor { getBalance() : query () -> async Nat;
  };

  var accounts : [Account] = []

  public shared composite query func getDeposits() {
    var deposits = 0;
      for (account in accounts.values()) {
      deposits += await account.getBalance()
  };
  deposits;
  };
}
```

Again, the shared keyword is redundant and can be omitted:

> ```motoko

Reviewer: example does not compile in repl

```suggestion
```motoko no-repl
```

A good example of a composite query might be a bank that holds references to its individual accounts, implemented as separate actors, and provides a composite query that sums the deposits in all its accounts:  

```motoko no-repl

> persistent actor Counter {

Reviewer 2: The indentation in this example is messed up (but I can't fix it with a suggestion)

>     type Account = actor { getBalance() : query () -> async Nat;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  type Account = actor { getBalance() : query () -> async Nat;
```

A good example of a composite query might be a bank that holds references to its individual accounts, implemented as separate actors, and provides a composite query that sums the deposits in all its accounts:  

```motoko no-repl
persistent actor Bank {

>   type Account = actor { getBalance() : query () -> async Nat;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  type Account = 
```

>   };

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    actor { getBalance() : query () -> async Nat };
```

  var accounts : [Account] = []

  public shared composite query func getDeposits() : async Nat {
    var deposits = 0;

>       for (account in accounts.values()) {
>       deposits += await account.getBalance();

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    for (account in accounts.values()) {
      deposits += await account.getBalance();
```

>   };

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    };
```

  deposits;
  };
}
```

Again, the shared keyword is redundant and can be omitted:

```motoko no-repl
persistent actor Bank {
  public composite query func getDeposits() : async Nat {
    var deposits = 0;
    for (account in accounts.values()) {
       deposits += await account.getBalance()
    };
    deposits;
  };
};
```

The type of `getDeposits` is `shared composite query () -> Nat`.

> ## Passing arguments to functions

Reviewer: The indentation of the examples in this section is inconsistent

>   public func userName(user: { name : Text; age : Nat }) : Text {
>     user.name;
>   }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
func userName(user: { name : Text; age : Nat }) : Text {
  user.name
}
```

```

> 

Reviewer 2: This function can also be written using a simpler record pattern, that matches on the fields of the record instead.
```motoko no-repl
func userName({ name : Text; age : Nat }) : Text {
  name
}
```
